# Background on areas

_Original author_: Lydia Warden (originall in .rmd)
_Additions_: Meng Le Zhang


------

# Derry (Londonderry): background information (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derry)

-	¬There is much contestation around the name of the city, officially named Londonderry but referred to as simply Derry by many. Derry City Council conducted an opinion poll in 2009 to gauge opinions on officially changing the city’s name to Derry. 75% of Catholics and 77% of Nationalists would accept the proposed change, compared to 6% of Protestants and 8% of Unionists. However, in everyday conversation, ‘Derry’ is used by most Protestant residents of the city.
-	Derry played an important role in the Second World War, with large numbers of military personnel based there from a range of allied nations. This ‘substantially altered the character of the city’, increasing its diversity, cosmopolitanism and boosting the economy.
-	The Troubles were widely believed to have started in Derry. During the early 1970s there was a strong military presence and widespread civil unrest. Several districts constructed barricades to control access and prevent forces from entering.
-	2011 Census: 105,066 population. 75% Roman Catholic, 23% Protestant (an increase of 3 percent from 2001).
-	The population of Protestants in the city has significantly decreased since the 1970s, with fears raised that the city could become permanently divided.
-	Industry:
o	There was previously a strong textiles industry in Derry, but this largely disappeared due to overseas competition.

Waterside: background information
-	The half of the city west of the river Foyle is known as the Cityside and the area east is called the Waterside. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derry)
-	Geography: Waterside refers to the part of Derry on the east bank of the Foyle. This ends at the Caw roundabout near Foyle Bridge. Areas including Eglinton and Limavady are not part of the Waterside. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterside,_Derry)
-	The Waterside is mainly Protestant and unionist, whereas the rest of Derry is mainly Irish Catholic and nationalist. Waterside’s Protestant population grew during the Troubles. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterside,_Derry)



Shirlow, P., Graham, B., McMullan, A., Murtagh, B., Robinsons, G. and Southern, N., (2005). Population Change and Social Inclusion Study Derry/Londonderry. https://cain.ulster.ac.uk/issues/population/popchangederry05.pdf


-	P5 In 2001, approximately 75% of the 105,066 residents of the Derry District Council Area (DDCA) came from a Catholic community background. The population of Derry itself was c.93000, 59% of whom resided in the Cityside, with the remainder living in the Waterside. The Cityside is majority Catholic, whereas the Waterside’s population is virtually evenly divided between Protestants and Catholics.
-	All respondents self-identified as Protestant or as having come from a Protestant background.
-	Objectives:
o	‘to determine the quantitative extent of separation/sharing between Protestants and the “other” community;
o	To examine the meaning of this separation/sharing for Protestants;
o	To establish if claims of Protestant alienation reflect the views of the community;
o	To assess the impact of population decline and out-migration upon the Protestant population;
o	P6 To produce an envisioning document that seeks to establish the structures and policies needed to encourage new forms of co-operation and sharing in Derry/Londonderry.’
-	P6 Principal methods: analysis of secondary census data; policy audit; detailed questionnaire survey of 400 Protestant households; focus groups; semi-structured interviews.

Chapter 1: Cultural and Political Change and the Protestant Community of Derry/Londonderry
-	‘The empirical evidence confirming a significant movement of Protestants from the Cityside is more complex than it might seem but still creates the spatial context for the study of Protestant marginalisation in the city.
-	Widely held belief that the minority Protestant population in the DDCA is in demographic and political decline due to a combination of out-migration and social and cultural change. Demographic decline has, however, halted.
-	Many interview respondents argued that the Protestant population has been ‘undermined’ by the political, economic and cultural growth of Irish nationalism/republicanism. Minority representation at a council level has led to feelings of political powerlessness, which operate alongside a strong feeling that nationalists/republicans do not recognise Protestant needs.
-	P10 ‘…the hostility generated by senses of alienation is not merely sectarian but is also directed towards certain political outcomes. Nevertheless, despite the obvious political difficulties created by such hostility, there are also signs of increased engagement, ecumenical activity and social interaction between Protestant and nationalist communities. This interaction within places that are predominantly Catholic is noted within the survey findings.’
-	P11 Different groups within the Protestant community experience alienation in varying ways. Senses of marginalisation are relative concepts, varying by class, gender, age and geography. Additionally, the decline in violence in Derry/Londonderry has altered mobility patterns.
-	P12 Most respondents identified a series of political developments which they stood to have undermined unionism. 11.8% believed that Protestants/unionists had benefitted more or a lot more than nationalists and republicans from the Belfast Agreement, compared to 53.4% who believed they had benefitted less.
-	P13 Less than 20% of Protestants said that they believed that they had an equal political say in the development of Derry/Londonderry.
-	P14 Over 2/3 of respondents felt that their culture is in decline. This related to the strong belief that Protestant cultural traditions are not protected; a common perception is ‘that Irish culture is funded and encouraged and British culture is denigrated and denied.’
-	The apparent Protestant retreat to the Waterside and elsewhere has defined the city’s absolute ethno-sectarian geography and increased problems associated with ethnic difference.
-	P15 increased interconnectedness between Protestant areas and consumer precincts in the Cityside (2/3 of respondents agreed that ‘Protestants are more likely to shop in Catholic places’.)
-	C.90% of respondents had never been victims of verbal abuse or emotional or physical violence in the previous 25 years => perceptions of violence has had a greater effect on mobility than direct experience of such violence. Perceptions of violence are understood as being aimed at a community than an individual.

P20 Chapter 2: Population Trends in Derry/Londonderry, 1991-2001.
-	Uses 1991 and 2001 census data to understand that demographic context, changing trends in DDCA over the decade and the spatial pattern of segregation in the DDCA.
-	Between 1971 and 1991, the Protestant population of the DDCA declined by an estimated 31%, compared to a 36% growth in the Catholic population.
-	In the same period, the Protestant population of the Cityside declined by 83.4%, matched by a 27% growth in the Protestant population in the Waterside. P20-21 This is thought to be mainly due to the out-migration of Protestants from the Cityside to the Waterside.
-	P22 three problems complicate comparison of the 1991 and 2001 census: there was an increase in 2001 of those refusing to state religious affiliation; the 2001 census included a question on community background which can be used as an alternative but makes direct comparison with the 1991 data more difficult; data collection units in 1991 were altered in 2001.
-	In 1991, 69.4% of the c95000 population identified as Catholic, vs 20.9% Protestant. There was an increase of 12.4% in the Catholic population between 1991 and 2001, compared to a marginal increase of 0.4% in the Protestant population.
-	P23 Broad spatial trends: the EDs/OAs in the Waterside area show greater spatial variation than the Cityside, which is mostly Catholic.
-	P25 In 2001, approximately half of those who designated themselves as Catholic and almost three quarters of those from a Catholic community background lived in areas where the population was 91-100% Catholic.
-	P26 In 1991, the Waterside population was 45.3% Protestant and 41.5% Catholic. By 2001, that trend had reversed, with 44.9% of the population Catholic and 41.5% Protestant. Both populations increased from 1991 to 2001, but the rate of increase was much higher for the Catholic population.
o	When information on community background is used, the proportion of people from a Protestant community background (49.5%) is greater than from a Catholic community background (48.3%).
o	P27 The proportion of Protestant and Catholic communities living in segregated areas (61-100% Protestant/Catholic) is 62.6% and 90.2% respectively when community background data is considered.

P32 Chapter 3: Questionnaire Survey Findings
-	399 respondents
-	Aimed to examine issues of segregation and cultural and political alienation and conflict amelioration in Derry/Londonderry.
-	P33 Around half of the respondents had moved to their present address. Of them, 8.1% had moved due to the previous area being unsafe. 3.3% had moved due to the previous area being dominated by the ‘other’ community. 4.3% had moved due to intimidation.
-	P34 97% of respondents stated that the Troubles were the cause of high levels of segregation. 87.2% agreed or strongly agreed that segregation creates poor community relationships.
-	52.6% felt that housing policy aided the reproduction of segregation.
-	93.9% of respondents believed that ‘Protestants feel safer living within predominantly Protestant places’. 51% believed that their community does not want to share space with the ‘other’ community. 65.2% believed that the ‘other’ community wanted their community ‘to move out of the city’.
-	20% agreed or strongly agreed that the ‘other’ community would welcome ‘greater mixing between my community and theirs’. Half disagreed or strongly disagreed.
-	P36 the majority of respondents (82.2%) considered themselves to be British. Northern Irish was the second-most common answer (14.2%). 4% preferred to be thought of as Irish. Ulster, Scottish and English each received between 1 and 2%.
-	Approximately half of respondents were ‘very proud’ of being British, compared to 3.5% who were ‘very proud’ to be Irish. One quarter stated they were ‘somewhat proud’ of being Irish. 4.5% did not see themselves as being British, compared to 57.7% who did not consider themselves to be Irish.
-	P38 significant variations based on age and gender.
-	P43 Significant findings that respondents felt that Catholics had better access to resources and educational opportunities than Protestants.
-	P45 82.6% of respondents had never been treated unfairly in a shop/business due to their religion. The majority of those in employment work in predominantly Catholic workplaces (61%), compared to 34% who do not. 56.5% of respondents had worked in a predominantly Catholic workplace during some period of their careers, with 9.7% stating that they would feel ‘uneasy’ doing so again. 17.2% would consider working in a predominantly Catholic workplace again. 59.9% would be content to work in such places. C.1/4 of respondents said they would not consider working ‘in a place where the majority of employees are Catholic’.
-	P46 47.8% of respondents felt that members of their own community were discriminated against when seeking work (18.9% answered maybe).
-	P52 Findings reveal that a high percentage of Protestants: feel that their community is in a state of decline; believe that segregation will continue (but they want it to continue); uphold the notion that their cultural identity is both in decline and unprotected within the city; interpret equality agendas as favouring the majority community within the DDCA area.

P54 Chapter 4: Perspectives on Place, Politics and Culture.
-	Focus groups: 9 drawn from Protestant community, 3 drawn from Catholic community.
-	P55 the survey finding that only a minority of Protestants had ever been the subject of verbal or physical abuse (either in the last 5 or 25 years) was confirmed by the majority of FG participants.
-	P56 many participants supported the finding that the majority were happy to shop in the Cityside. Some confirmed that they would shop there but that there were particular areas of the Cityside where they would feel more comfortable than others.
-	P57 The general consensus was that people go there to shop but they park nearby the shops they need to visit, purchase what they need, and leave straight away.
-	P59 Former Cityside Protestants spoke with regret a strong sense of emotional loss about their move to the Waterside.
-	P66 Protestants are concerned by the rate of demographic change taking place in the Waterside. Some felt that a rise in the Catholic population will have negative effects for the Protestant community. This sense of threat was generally felt more strongly in working-class areas where segregation is the norm.
-	P69 Whilst a substantial minority of Protestants who responded to the survey stated that they would not be bothered by changing the city’s name, this emerged through the focus groups as a significant source of potential Protestant alienation. They emphasised its importance to their identity, and that the proposal to remove ‘London’ was ‘an ideologically-driven attempt to rid the city of its Britishness’. It would put further pressure on the identification that Protestants feel with the city, with respondents stating that they already “feel that we’re sort of strangers in our own place”.

P97 Chapter 6: Conclusion
-	P101-2 Conflict transformation: there is a danger that Protestants may be disconnected from wider social, economic, policy and pol



## Minority Communities in Derry/Londonderry


https://www.bbc.co.uk/northernireland/schools/11_16/citizenship/pdfs/ctz_eth_pg02_tn.pdf
-	According to 2001 Census data, in Foyle (The parliamentary constituency in Derry), there are a total of 962 ethnic minority residents out of a population of 105,078 (0.92%).
-	Due to its more remote physical location, political instability, and the fact that Northern Ireland is one of the poorest regions in the UK so there are a lack of jobs and business opportunities, Northern Ireland has never seen a significant inflow of people.
-	Populations of Indian, Bangladeshi, Pakistani and Chinese immigrants (mostly from Hong Kong) migrated when their home countries were part of the British Empire. C.60% of Chinese people living in Northern Ireland were born there.
-	Irish travellers are one of the largest ethnic groups in Northern Ireland.
-	Nearly a third of those belonging to ethnic minority communities live in Belfast.
-	The number of people born in non-UK EU Countries as of 2001 was 406 in Foyle (0.39%).


https://www.ninis2.nisra.gov.uk/public/PivotGrid.aspx?ds=1114&lh=37&yn=2007-2009&sk=74&sn=Population&yearfilter=
-	As of 2009 there were 800 Central and Eastern European Migrants in Derry (0.7% of total population).


Table showing the number of people identifying as different ethnic groups in the 2011 Census (Derry City and Strabane): https://www.ninis2.nisra.gov.uk/public/PivotGrid.aspx?ds=7468&lh=73&yn=2011&sk=136&sn=Census%202011&yearfilter=
-	The population is 98.53% White, with the next largest communities being Indian (0.45%), Mixed (0.31%) and Chinese (0.2%).


There are thought to be 30000 Polish people living in Northern Ireland, with many moving following Poland joining the EU in search of work. (As of 2007). (http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/6251117.stm; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immigrant_communities_in_Northern_Ireland).


Derry City & Strabane District Council Good Relations Team Publication: https://www.derrystrabane.com/getmedia/c23b6fc6-c6e3-4095-a96c-c66026b8a7fd/Good-relations.pdf
-	According to the 2011 Census there are 3696 people living in the area who were born outside of the UK and Republic of Ireland. This is 2.5% of the population, lower than the 4.5% average across Northern Ireland.
o	Includes Asian (mainly Chinese, Indian and Filipino); Eastern European (mainly Polish); African and Middle Eastern Communities.
o	2000 residents aged 3 and over have a language other than Enlgihs or Irish as their main language. Of them, 23% cannot speak English well or at all. Polish, Malayalam (an Indian language), Chinese and Tagalog (a Filipino language) are some of the main minority ethnic languages.
o	Top reasons for moving were Family (41%), Work (29%) and Education (10%).
-	921 racially motivated hate crimes were recorded in Northern Ireland in 2014/15. 110 of these were in the ‘G’ District that covers the North West. C.10% of these attacks were on children.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-49435877
In 2018, net migration to Northern Ireland reached a 10-year peak. It was the fifth year in a row in which the migrant population increased.
Derry City was one of only two council districts to experience a net outflow of international migrants.


Findings of the Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey showed high levels of racist, Islamophobic and xenophobic views among a significant minority (https://www.derryjournal.com/news/crime/race-hate-spike-in-derry-reported-alongside-intolerance-among-18-to-24-year-olds-against-eastern-europeans-and-muslims-3167339):
-	Whilst there was a trend of decreasing levels of hate crimes across the north, Derry and Strabane recorded an increase.
-	Fewer people reported having black friends than in previous years. Only 14% of respondents report having Black friends in 2019. This figure has steadily declined from 19% five years previously.
-	There were high levels of slavophobia and intolerance towards other Eastern European peoples and nationalities amongst young people. The survey found that in 2017 38% of 18- to 24-year-olds would not accept an Eastern European as a friend. This fell to 13% in 2018 and 9% in 2019.
-	Persistently high levels of Islamophobia were evident across the Six Counties. One third of 18- to 24-year-olds wouldn’t accept a Muslim as a neighbour in their local area, the only age group higher than this is the over 65s. 31% of respondents aged 18 to 24 said that they would not accept a Muslim as a close friend in 2019.
o	This is particularly concerning as one third of Derry’s population are aged under 25, meaning that these responses represent a large proportion of the population (https://www.derryjournal.com/news/environment/opinion-derry-irelands-only-shrinking-city-steve-bradley-3171626).
-	According to PSNI data, hate crime had increased in 2020. Although there was a reduction in racist incidents and crimes from January to December 2020, in Derry there was an increase of 12 racist incidents and an increase of 13 racist crimes in this time. Derry and Strabane saw the greatest increase in racist incidents from January 2019 to December 2020 and the second highest increase in racist crimes from January to December. This was during lockdown so was a particular cause for concern.
-	By comparison, during the same period, the number of sectarian incidents in Derry and Strabane decreased by 49 cases and sectarian crimes decreased by 42 cases.
-	Foyle Racial Equality Forum noted that there are a large number of cases that do not get reported.


https://www.derryjournal.com/news/politics/29-self-report-prejudice-against-minority-ethnic-groups-with-rise-in-racist-incidents-crimes-and-bullying-and-harassment-in-schools-3184979
-	Graphic showing a breakdown of self-reported prejudice by gender, religion and age is included in the article.
-	The results of the ‘Northern Ireland Racial Equality Indicators Report: 2014-2019’ were published in March 2021. It presents data measuring progress on the Racial Equality Strategy 2015 – 2025 on 4 key areas: equality of service provision; combating prejudice, racism and hate crime; participation, representation and belonging; respecting cultural diversity.
-	In 2019, the proportion of respondents self-reporting prejudice against people from minority ethnic communities had increased significantly: in 2014 the baseline was 24%, this dropped to 20% in 2018 before rising again to 29% in 2019.
-	In spite of this, there was a significant decrease in the proportion of respondents thinking that there is more racial prejudice against people from minority ethnic communities than 5 years ago (2014: 52%, 2018: 41%, 2019: 30%).
-	The number of racist incidents reported has also increased from the baseline of 976 in 2013/14 to 1124 in 2018/19. The number of racist crimes also increased (2013/14: 688, 2018/19: 699). There was a significant increase in the proportion of respondents who reported that they had witnessed racist bullying or harassment in their school, with the figure for 2019 at 45%, compared to 39% in 2014.
-	There has been an increase in the acceptance of some groups, with willingness to accept Eastern European, Irish Traveller and Muslims as residents, work colleagues or family members all increasing significantly since the baseline.
-	There appears to have been improvement in the educational attainment for all groups, but gaps in achievement and inequality persist. Since 2013/14, there has been an increase of around 7% for both White and minority ethnic pupils leaving school with 5 GCSEs (Grade A*-C). White: 86.5%, minority ethnic: 82.4%. There has been little change in the proportion of White school leaves with no qualifications (2013/14: 0.7%; 2018/19: 0.6%) and a decrease in the percentage of minority ethnic school leavers with no qualifications (2013/14: 5.8%, 2018/19: 2.2%).
-	Compared to the baseline, there has been a significant decrease in the proportion of respondents who thought that minority ethnic people participated ‘a little’ or ‘a lot’ in public life: 2014: 71%, 2019: 57%.
-	A significantly higher proportion of respondents aged 16 years in 2019 said that they socialised or played sport with people from a different ethnic background than in 2014 – increased from 54% to 62%.
-	Following the basline, there has been no significant change in the percentage of respondents who agreed that the culture and traditions of the minority ethnic community added to the richness and diversity of Northern Ireland (2014: 59%; 2019: 61%). However, there was a significant decrease from 2018 to 2019 (2018: 65%).
-	The percentage of people with friends from minority ethnic communities has increased from the baseline of 42% to 53%.



Report that may be useful – The Roma Community in Northern Ireland and housing: A Scoping Review (https://www.nihe.gov.uk/Documents/Research/Shared-Communities-Page/Roma-community-Northern-Ireland-and-Housing.aspx?ext=.)


----
# Masbrough and Rotherham: background information
author: Lydia
date: "03/08/2021"

-	Approx. 5% of the population in the Rotherham West ward (largely co-extensive with Masbrough) were born in non-UK EU countries (572). 591 residents were born in South Asia, 77 in the Middle East, 69 in Zimbabwe and 60 in Central and West Africa. Most respondents in the 2011 Census identified as ethnically White British, White European or British Pakistani. ‘The dense minorities communities in the ward are due to the affordability of local housing.’ (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masbrough).
o	Total population: 13262 (2011 Census in https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masbrough)
-	Former industrial area, which produced lots of iron and brass amongst other products such as jars. (https://industrial-archaeology.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/1995-Industrial-History-of-South-Yorkshire.pdf).
-	Industrial structure: History of mining and manufacturing as major industries. (https://www.visionofbritain.org.uk/unit/10084763/cube/IND_SECTOR_GEN)
-	Significant fluctuations in unemployment rates since 1930: Large increase from 1970s to 1990s, significant drop between 1990 and 2000 but steadily increasing once again, c.8% in 2010. Higher than Great British average since 1970, approximately 1% higher in 2010 (https://www.visionofbritain.org.uk/unit/10084763/rate/CENSUS_MALE_UNEM).
-	The monks at Kirkstead Abbey near Kimberworth began smelting iron around 1160, and ‘the history of the area is heavily influence by industrial developments, especially in iron, steel and coal.’


Rotherham: background information
-	2011 demographic information (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotherham):
o	Rotherham USD (urban subdivision): 85.6% White British, 8.3% Asian, 1.3% Black.
o	Rotherham (Borough): 91.9% White British, 4.1% Asian, 0.8% Black.



-------
# LSOA Boundaries - Development and Validation
author: "Lydia Warden"
date: "27/07/2021"

LSOA Boundaries: Development and Validation
-	LSOAs were constructed from OAs and designed to contain between 1000 and 3000 residents and 400 to 1200 households. (Tower Hamlets, 2013, p4).
-	Changes were implemented between 2001 and 2011 to reflect population growth, in most cases leading to an increase in the number of LSOAs (Tower Hamlets, 2013, p7).
-	The ONS conducted consultations to gain feedback on proposed changes to output area boundaries ahead of the 2011 and 2021 censuses. Responses were given in the form of written feedback. A large proportion of respondents were representatives from councils and related organisations (ONS, 2021). The consultations requested feedback on proposed strategies for making changes to boundaries, rather than validation of the new boundaries (ONS, 2021).

Vickers, D. and Rees, P., (2007). Creating the UK National Statistics 2001 output area classification. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A, Statistics in Society. 170(2), pp.379-403.

-	P380 Area classification refers to the classification of areas into groups in the basis of the similarity of characteristics within them. One of the most commonly used area classifications is geodemographic classifications, which ‘works on the principle that the place and the population are inextricably linked.’ Information including age, ethnicity, education, employment and type of housing is used to find out about the people who live in an area, as if similar people live in similar places we can infer knowledge about others from knowledge about one.
-	P381 Classifications are created using cluster analysis.
-	P390-1 41 variables were selected for input to the classification
o	Demographic variables including age, ethnicity, proportion of the population that were foreign-born and population density.
o	Household composition: separated/divorced, single person households, single pensioner households, lone parent households, childless couples and households with non-dependent children.
o	Housing: renting, terraced, detached, flats, no central heating, average house size (no of rooms), people per room.
o	Socioeconomic: HE qualification, employment, 2+ cars, public transport to work, WFH, long-term limiting illness, providing unpaid care.
o	Employment: students, unemployed, part-time, proportions working in different industries.
-	P395 Selection of the number of clusters involved consultation with potential users and members of the ONS area classification advisory board.
-	P398 Each cluster was named based on the profile features that distinguish it from other clusters.
-	P399 Comments and suggestions on names were received from people who took part in a consultation exercise about the classification.

Martin, D., (2002). Geography for the 2001 Census in England and Wales. Population Trends. 108, pp.7-15.
-	P7 An important function of a census geography system is to provide a framework for the publication of small area census statistics.

-	P8 1991 and previous: Enumeration Districts (EDs) are used to ‘facilitate efficient and accurate distribution and collection of census forms by enumerators, while attempting to equalize enumerator workload.’ Aimed for ED boundaries not to straddle major roads, rivers, railway lines or extensive areas of open space. EDs also had to nest within wards and parishes/communities – which was particularly important in previous censuses when the EDs themselves were used as output areas.
-	P9 ED Design for 2001: Completed ED design using GIS, then re-planned certain areas using the latest available address-point data, which was supplemented by the findings from enumeration and processing (to ensure that the ED geography reflected the residential structure on census day as closely as possible).
-	P10 Output area design: attempted to construct OAs that, where possible, are assembled from whole unit postcodes to facilitate better integration between census and postcode geographies (previously a major challenge with 1991 EDs). Other important considerations included the standardisation of OA population sizes, maximisation of internal social homogeneity and less irregular geographical shaped areas.
-	P12 Measuring homogeneity: ‘An area which has provoked considerably interest in consultation with census users…’.
o	‘A particular concern of many users has been that EDs from previous censuses have often obscured social divisions, which would be of importance in the context of local service planning and resource allocation.’
o	Initial experiments with automated zone design used a simple homogeneity measure to maximise the uniformity of households falling within different categories (used tenure categories – owner occupied, privately rented, rented from LA or housing association). The dominant category may, however, account for less than half of households in areas with a good spread of tenure categories. Therefore, required a more sophisticated measure.
o	Tranmer and Steel discussed using intra-area correlation (IAC). P13 ‘Maximising IAC may be thought of as configuring OAs in such a way that the largest proportion of the variation in the relevant variable(s) between different postcode building blocks occurs across OA boundaries, while the smallest proportion occurs between postcodes inside the same OA.’
o	P13 Current proposal is to use 4 tenure categories and 7 dwelling type categories, combined with equal weighting to produce an overall homogeneity measure.
o	Shape: consultations found that census users would prefer OAs follow discrete settlements rather than possess compact shapes.

Qamer, F.M., Shehzad, K., Abbas, S., Murthy, MSR., Xi, C., Gilani, H. and Bajracharya, B., (2016). Mapping Deforestation and Forest Degradation Patterns in Western Himalaya, Pakistan. Remote Sensing. 11(7), pp.831
Used satellite images to generate sub-district level statistics for forest cover over the Western Himalaya in Pakistan. The digital classification was reviewed by professionals with backgrounds in remote sensing and a strong ecological knowledge of the local area (including experts from the WWF-Pakistan, Karakorum International University and the National Agriculture Research Centre). This was to check for misinterpretations in the digital classification that may have been caused by environmental conditions at the time of image acquisition (e.g., clouds, fog), variations in local forest types or limitations in computational algorithms.

References:
Martin, D., (1998). 2001 Census output areas: from concept to prototype. Population Trends. 94, pp.19-24.
ONS., (2021). Consultation response: Census 2021 Output Geography Policy, Products and Services [online]. London: ONS. [Viewed 27 July 2021]. Available from: https://consultations.ons.gov.uk/external-affairs/ons-2021-census-output-geography-policy-products-a/results/2021geographyoutputsconsultation_response_v5.pdf
Tower Hamlets., (2013). Research Briefing: A Guide to Census Geography [online]. London: Tower Hamlets. [Viewed 27 July 2021]. Available from: https://www.towerhamlets.gov.uk/Documents/Borough_statistics/Research-tools-and-guidance/RB-Census2011-Census-Geography-Guide-2013-05.pdf

Other useful sources:
Copy of consultation questionnaire from 2011 consultation: https://www.mrs.org.uk/pdf/MRS_CGG_Geography_consultation_response.pdf
Martin, D., (1998). 2001 Census output areas: from concept to prototype. Population Trends. 94, pp.19-24. – Outlines the process of using GIS to create the output areas – doesn’t discuss validation.
